PEP 730: More revisions and clarifications (#3529)
python/peps: peps/pep-0730.rst

iOS code is compiled for compatibility against a minimum iOS version.

Apple frequently refers to "iPadOS" in their marketing material. However, from a
development perspective, there is no discernable difference between iPadOS and
iOS. A binary that has been compiled for the ``iphoneos`` or ``iphonesimulator``

> ABIs can be deployed on iPad.

Reviewer: It might be worth mentioning here that tvOS and watchOS are *not* included in this PEP.

Author: Updated to include a paragraph specifically excluding tvOS, watchOS and visionOS.

construct the location of a binary module by using the ``__file__`` attribute of
the Python module no longer holds.

As with macOS, compiling a binary module that is accessible from a
statically-linked build of Python requires the use of the ``--undefined
dynamic_lookup`` option to avoid linking ``libPython`` into every binary module.
However, on iOS, this compiler flag raises a deprecation warning when it is

> used. This warning has been observed on macOS as well - however, responses from
> Apple staff suggests that they `do not intend to break the CPython ecosystem by
> removing this option <https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/719961>`__. As

Reviewer: The warning on macOS has a different wording which doesn't mention deprecation.

Also, replace the link with a more recent and complete statement from Apple.

```suggestion
used. A warning from this flag has been observed on macOS as well - however, responses from
Apple staff suggest that they `do not intend to break the CPython ecosystem by
removing this option <https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/97524#issuecomment-1458855301>`__. As
```

``foo.bar._whiz.framework``). A framework is a directory; the finder will look
for ``_whiz.dylib`` in that directory.

Compilation
-----------

The only binary format that will be supported is a dynamically-linkable

> ``libPython.dylib``, packaged in an iOS-compatible framework format. While the

Reviewer: I assume this would follow the macOS pattern of a lower case "p" and a version number? 
```
lrwxrwxr-x  1 root  admin  9 Feb  9  2023 /Library/Frameworks/Python.framework/Versions/3.12/lib/libpython3.12.dylib -> ../Python
```

If so, the other references to "libPython" should also be updated.

```suggestion
``libpython3.x.dylib``, packaged in an iOS-compatible framework format. While the
```

install`` pass will produce a ``Python.framework`` artefact that can be used on
a single ABI and architecture.

Additional tooling will be required to merge the ``Python.framework`` builds for
multiple architectures into a single "fat" library. Tooling will also be
required to merge multiple ABIs into the ``XCframework`` format that Apple uses
to distribute multiple frameworks for different ABIs in a single bundle.

An Xcode project will be provided for the purpose of running the CPython test
suite. Tooling will be provided to automate the process of compiling the test
suite binary, start the simulator, install the test suite, and execute it.

Distribution
------------

Adding iOS as a Tier 3 platform only requires adding support for compiling an
iOS-compatible build from an unpatched CPython code checkout. It does not
require production of officially distributed iOS artefacts for use by end-users.

If/when iOS is updated to Tier 2 or 1 support, the tooling used to generate an
``XCframework`` package could be used to produce an iOS distribution artefact.
This could then be distributed as an "embedded distribution" analogous to the

> Windows embedded distribution, or as a Cocoapod or Swift Package that could be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Windows embedded distribution, or as a CocoaPods or Swift package that could be
```

Author: Agreed that the capitalization on "CocoaPod" is incorrect... but I'm not sure about the pluralisation. The project is "CocoaPods", but their [documentation](https://guides.cocoapods.org) refers to "Making a CocoaPod", so the singular would seem more appropriate.

Reviewer 2: Good spot, I've changed the suggestion to singular.

Author: The updated version already incorporates these 2 changes

``foo.bar._whiz.framework``). A framework is a directory; the finder will look
for ``_whiz.dylib`` in that directory.

Compilation
-----------

The only binary format that will be supported is a dynamically-linkable
``libpython3.x.dylib``, packaged in an iOS-compatible framework format. While
the ``--undefined dynamic_lookup`` compiler option currently works, the
long-term viability of the option cannot be guaranteed. Rather than rely on a
compiler flag with an uncertain future, binary modules on iOS will be linked

> with ``libpython3.x``. This, in turn, makes statically-linkable builds of
> ``libpython3.x.a`` impractical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with ``libpython3.x.dylib``. This, in turn, makes statically-linkable builds 
of ``libpython3.x.a`` impractical.
```

Author: I don't believe this suggestion is correct - or, at least, it doesn't capture what I was trying to communicate. The intention here is to say that binary modules will be linked with whatever library has been built. If you've built dynamic, then that's fine; but if you've built static, it *could* be linked into binary modules, but the resulting modules would be impractically large.

Reviewer: I don't think an extension module could ever be linked against a static libpython, because that would cause duplication of globals. So the edit is technically unnecessary, but I thought it was better to be explicit.

Maybe something like this?
```
binary modules on iOS will be linked
with ``libpython3.x.dylib``. This, in turn, means they will not be loadable by an 
executable statically linked against ``libpython3.x.a``, so no such static library 
will be supported. This is the same pattern currently used by CPython on Windows.

For more details, see "Supporting static builds" below.
```

Author: Updated to reflect something close to this wording.

architecture, and simulator binaries are not considered to be distributable
artefacts, so only one architecture is needed to build an app for a simulator.

Supporting static builds
------------------------

While the long-term viability of the ``--undefined dynamic_lookup`` option
cannot be guaranteed, the option does exist, and it works. One option would be
to ignore the deprecation warning, and hope that Apple either reverses the
deprecation decision, or never finalizes the deprecation.

Given that Apple's decision-making process is entirely opaque, this would be, at
best, a risky option. When combined with the fact that the broader iOS
development ecosystem encourages the use of frameworks, there are no legacy uses
of a static library to consider, and the only benefit to a statically-linked iOS
``libpython3.x`` is a very slightly reduced app startup time, omitting support
for static builds of ``libpython3.x`` seems a reasonable compromise.

> It is worth nothing that there has been some discussion on `an alternate

Reviewer 3: nothing -> noting?
